[REVIEW] Merge `copy-on-write` feature branch into `branch-23.04` (#12619)
rapidsai/cudf: docs/cudf/source/developer_guide/library_design.md

cuDF implements corresponding objects with the same APIs.
Internally, these objects typically interact with cuDF objects at the Frame layer via composition.
However, for performance reasons they frequently access internal attributes and methods of `Frame` and its subclasses.

## Copy-on-write

> 
> Copy-on-write (COW) is designed to reduce memory footprint on GPUs. With this feature, a copy (`.copy(deep=False)`) is only really made whenever
> there is a write operation on a column. It is first recommended to see
> the public usage [here](copy-on-write-user-doc) of this functionality before reading through the internals

Reviewer: No need to rewrite the justifications since we're referring devs to the user guide anyway.
```suggestion
This section describes the internal implementation details of the copy-on-write feature.
It is recommended that developers familiarize themselves with [the user-facing documentation](copy-on-write-user-doc) of this functionality before reading through the internals
```

below.

> The core copy-on-write implementation relies on the `CopyOnWriteBuffer` class. This class stores the pointer to the device memory and size.
> With the help of `CopyOnWriteBuffer._ptr` we generate [weak references](https://docs.python.org/3/library/weakref.html) of `CopyOnWriteBuffer` and store it in `CopyOnWriteBuffer._instances`.
> This is a mapping from `ptr` keys to `WeakSet`s containing references to `CopyOnWriterBuffer` objects. This
> means all the new `CopyOnWriteBuffer`s that are created map to the same key in `CopyOnWriteBuffer._instances` if they have same `._ptr`
> i.e., if they are all pointing to the same device memory.
> 
> When the cudf option `"copy_on_write"` is `True`, `as_buffer` will always return a `CopyOnWriteBuffer`. This class contains all the
> mechanisms to enable copy-on-write for all buffers. When a `CopyOnWriteBuffer` is created, its weakref is generated and added to the `WeakSet` which is in turn stored in `CopyOnWriterBuffer._instances`. This will later serve as an indication of whether or not to make a copy when a
> when write operation is performed on a `Column` (see below).

Reviewer: This explanation is really good, just suggesting some reorganization to reduce duplication and help the flow.
```suggestion
The core copy-on-write implementation relies on the `CopyOnWriteBuffer` class.
When the cudf option `"copy_on_write"` is `True`, `as_buffer` will always return a `CopyOnWriteBuffer`.
This subclass of `cudf.Buffer` contains all the mechanisms to enable copy-on-write behavior.
The class stores [weak references](https://docs.python.org/3/library/weakref.html) to every existing `CopyOnWriteBuffer` in `CopyOnWriteBuffer._instances`, a mapping from `ptr` keys to `WeakSet`s containing references to `CopyOnWriterBuffer` objects.
This means that all `CopyOnWriteBuffer`s that point to the same device memory are contained in the same `WeakSet` (corresponding to the same `ptr` key) in `CopyOnWriteBuffer._instances`.
This data structure is then used to determine whether or not to make a copy when a
when write operation is performed on a `Column` (see below).
If multiple buffers point to the same underlying memory, then a copy must be made whenever a modification is attempted.
```

### Eager copies when exposing to third-party libraries

If `Column`/`CopyOnWriteBuffer` is exposed to a third-party library via `__cuda_array_interface__`, we are no longer able to track whether or not modification of the buffer has occurred without introspection. Hence whenever
someone accesses data through the `__cuda_array_interface__`, we eagerly trigger the copy by calling
`_unlink_shared_buffers` which ensures a true copy of underlying device data is made and

> unlinks the buffer from any shared "weak" references. Any future shallow-copy requests must also trigger a true physical copy (since we cannot track the lifetime of the third-party object), to handle this we also mark the `Column`/`CopyOnWriteBuffer` as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
unlinks the buffer from any shared "weak" references. Any future copy requests must also trigger a true physical copy (since we cannot track the lifetime of the third-party object). To handle this we also mark the `Column`/`CopyOnWriteBuffer` as
```

> `obj._zero_copied=True` thus indicating any future shallow-copy requests will trigger a true physical copy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`obj._zero_copied=True` thus indicating that any future shallow-copy requests will trigger a true physical copy
```

rather than a copy-on-write shallow copy with weak references.

> ### How to obtain read-only object?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Obtaining a read-only object
```

A read-only object can be quite useful for operations that will not

> mutate the data. This can be achieved by calling `._readonly_proxy_cai_obj`
> API, this API will return a proxy object that has `__cuda_array_interface__`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mutate the data. This can be achieved by calling `._readonly_proxy_cai_obj`.
This function will return a proxy object that has `__cuda_array_interface__`
```

implemented and will not trigger a deep copy even if the `CopyOnWriteBuffer`

> has weak references. It is only recommended to use this API as long as
> the objects/arrays created with this proxy object gets cleaned up during
> the developer code execution. We currently use this API for device to host

Reviewer: ```suggestion
has weak references. This API should only be used when the lifetime of the proxy object is restricted to cudf's internal code execution. Handing this out to external libraries or user-facing APIs will lead to untracked references and undefined copy-on-write behavior. We currently use this API for device to host
```

copies like in `ColumnBase.data_array_view(mode="read")` which is used for `Column.values_host`.

> 

Author: Done 👍

> Notes:
> 1. Weak references are implemented only for fixed-width data types as these are only column
> types that can be mutated in place.
> 2. Deep copies of variable width data types return shallow-copies of the Columns, because these
> types don't support real in-place mutations to the data. We just mimic in such a way that it looks
> like an in-place operation using `_mimic_inplace`.

Reviewer: Let's just make this a separate section

```suggestion
### Variable width data types
Weak references are implemented only for fixed-width data types as these are only column
types that can be mutated in place.
Deep copies of variable width data types return shallow-copies of the Columns, because these
types don't support real in-place mutations to the data.
Internally, we mimic in-place mutations using `_mimic_inplace`, but the resulting data is always a deep copy of the underlying data.
```

>>> s3.data._ptr
139796315897856
```

Now, when we perform a write operation on one of them, say on `s2`, a new copy is created
for `s2` on device and then modified:

```python
>>> s2[0:2] = 10
>>> s2
0    10
1    10
2     3
3     4
dtype: int64
>>> s1
0    1
1    2
2    3
3    4
dtype: int64
>>> s3
0    1
1    2
2    3
3    4
dtype: int64
```

If we inspect the memory address of the data, `s1` and `s3` still share the same address but `s2` has a new one:

```python
>>> s1.data._ptr
139796315897856
>>> s3.data._ptr
139796315897856
>>> s2.data._ptr
139796315899392
```

Now, performing write operation on `s1` will trigger a new copy on device memory as there
is a weak reference being shared in `s3`:

```python
>>> s1[0:2] = 11
>>> s1
0    11
1    11
2     3
3     4
dtype: int64
>>> s2
0    10
1    10
2     3
3     4
dtype: int64
>>> s3
0    1
1    2
2    3
3    4
dtype: int64
```

If we inspect the memory address of the data, the addresses of `s2` and `s3` remain unchanged, but `s1`'s memory address has changed because of a copy operation performed during the writing:

```python
>>> s2.data._ptr
139796315899392
>>> s3.data._ptr
139796315897856
>>> s1.data._ptr
139796315879723
```

> cudf Copy-on-write implementation is motivated by pandas Copy-on-write proposal here:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
cudf's copy-on-write implementation is motivated by the pandas proposals documented here:
```

cuDF implements corresponding objects with the same APIs.
Internally, these objects typically interact with cuDF objects at the Frame layer via composition.
However, for performance reasons they frequently access internal attributes and methods of `Frame` and its subclasses.

(copy-on-write-dev-doc)=

## Copy-on-write

This section describes the internal implementation details of the copy-on-write feature.
It is recommended that developers familiarize themselves with [the user-facing documentation](copy-on-write-user-doc) of this functionality before reading through the internals
below.

> The core copy-on-write implementation relies on the `CopyOnWriteBuffer` class.

Author: I think we did just above no? (`(copy-on-write-user-doc)`)

> The core copy-on-write implementation relies on the `CopyOnWriteBuffer` class.

Reviewer: I think @wence- wants a link to the class, something like :class:`cudf.core.buffer.CopyOnWriteBuffer`. AFAIK buffer classes don't actually show up in our rendered docs though since they aren't public APIs, so we may not benefit from this.

> The core copy-on-write implementation relies on the `CopyOnWriteBuffer` class.

Author: Right, we don't generate docstrings for non-public APIs, so we will not really see a link here anyway.

If multiple buffers point to the same underlying memory, then a copy must be made whenever a modification is attempted.

### Eager copies when exposing to third-party libraries

If a `Column`/`CopyOnWriteBuffer` is exposed to a third-party library via `__cuda_array_interface__`, we are no longer able to track whether or not modification of the buffer has occurred. Hence whenever
someone accesses data through the `__cuda_array_interface__`, we eagerly trigger the copy by calling
`_unlink_shared_buffers` which ensures a true copy of underlying device data is made and
unlinks the buffer from any shared "weak" references. Any future copy requests must also trigger a true physical copy (since we cannot track the lifetime of the third-party object). To handle this we also mark the `Column`/`CopyOnWriteBuffer` as
`obj._zero_copied=True` thus indicating that any future shallow-copy requests will trigger a true physical copy
rather than a copy-on-write shallow copy with weak references.

### Obtaining a read-only object

A read-only object can be quite useful for operations that will not

> mutate the data. This can be achieved by calling `._readonly_proxy_cai_obj`.

Reviewer: I don't think this property should exist anymore, it's just the getter function with `readonly=True`.

Author: Removed this property

has weak references. This API should only be used when the lifetime of the proxy object is restricted to cudf's internal code execution. Handing this out to external libraries or user-facing APIs will lead to untracked references and undefined copy-on-write behavior. We currently use this API for device to host
copies like in `ColumnBase.data_array_view(mode="read")` which is used for `Column.values_host`.

### Internal access to raw data pointers

Since it is unsafe to access the raw pointer associated with a buffer when
copy-on-write is enabled, in addition to the readonly proxy object described above,
access to the pointer is gated through `Buffer.get_ptr`. This method accepts a mode
argument through which the caller indicates how they will access the data associated
with the buffer. If only read-only access is required (`mode="read"`), this indicates
that the caller has no intention of modifying the buffer through this pointer.
In this case, any shallow copies are not unlinked. In contrast, if modification is
required one may pass `mode="write"`, provoking unlinking of any shallow copies.
The same mechanism is also used for `SpillableBuffer`, though in that case one must

> also consider acquiring a spill lock (see `Buffer` [design](Buffer-design) for more details).

Reviewer: We can remove reference to the spill lock since that's implicit now.

Reviewer: Did we update the relevant documentation for SpillableBuffer when we made that change?

Author: > We can remove reference to the spill lock since that's implicit now.

Done

> Did we update the relevant documentation for SpillableBuffer when we made that change?

Yup, we did.
